*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK FOR A LITTLE COOK ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Juliet Sutherland, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            A little Book

                          for A little Cook




                            COPYRIGHT 1905

                           BY L.P. HUBBARD.




                             PUBLISHED BY

                        Pillsbury, Minneapolis

       *       *       *       *       *




DIRECTIONS


1. Always use Pillsbury's Best Flour.

2. Sift flour twice before adding to cakes or breakfast cakes.

3. _Make all measurements_ level by using edge of knife to
lightly scrape off from top of cup or spoon until material is
even with the edges.

4. Use same sized cups or spoons in measuring for the same
recipe.

5. Before starting to make recipe, read through carefully, then
put on table all the materials and tools needed in making that
particular recipe.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NOTE TO THE MODERN READER


_A Little Book for a Little Cook_ was originally published by
Pillsbury in 1905. This new reproduction has all of the recipes
from the original softcover edition, but is being reissued with
the modern reader in mind. The collector will note some small
departures from the original book, but the little cook will no
doubt find what is here to be fun to cook, delicious, and warmly
nostalgic.

     For best results, we recommend the following recipe changes
     when preparing these old-fashioned recipes. When using
     Pillsbury BEST® Flour, there is no need to sift the flour.
     Just lightly spoon the flour into the measuring cup and
     level it off. When combining the flour with other dry
     ingredients, stir the ingredients together with a fork.

     Bread: Soak 1 (.6 oz.) cake compressed yeast or 1 pkg.
     active dry yeast and 1 tablespoon sugar in 2 tablespoons
     lukewarm (105-110°F.) water for 2 minutes. Knead dough 5 to
     10 minutes. Let dough rise in warm place until it is _almost
     double in size_. Grease, bottom only, 8×4 or 9×5-inch loaf
     pan. Bake at 375°F. for 35 to 40 minutes or until light
     golden brown.

     Biscuits: Bake on a lightly greased cookie sheet at 425°F.
     for 9 to 11 minutes.

     Ginger Bread: Bake in a greased 13x9-inch pan at 350°F. for
     23 to 27 minutes.

     Sponge Cake: Bake in a greased and floured 9-inch square or
     11×7-inch pan at 350°F. for 24 to 29 minutes.

     Muffins: Bake in a greased 12-cup muffin pan at 400°F. for
     12 to 16 minutes.

     Creamed Potatoes: If a double boiler is unavailable, cook in
     a heavy saucepan over medium heat until mixture thickens,
     about 5 minutes.

     Fudge: Cook in a small heavy saucepan; pour mixture into a
     buttered 9x5 or 8x4-inch pan.

     Chocolate Cake: Bake in a greased and floured 8-inch square
     pan at 350°F. for 23 to 27 minutes or until toothpick
     inserted in center comes out clean.

     Johnny Cake: Bake in a greased 8-inch square pan at 400°F.
     for 15 to 20 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *




BREAD


MATERIAL:

1/2 cup boiling water
1/2 cup milk
1/2 cake yeast
2 tablespoons cold water
1 teaspoon salt
3 cups Pillsbury's Best

WAY OF PREPARING:

Soak yeast in 2 tablespoons cold water. Pour 1/2 cup boiling
water into 1/2 cup milk. _Let cool to lukewarm._ Stir in
dissolved yeast and salt. Add 3 cups Pillsbury's Best. Turn onto
a kneading board. Knead until smooth. Let rise until three times
the original size. Knead slightly, put into a well greased pan.
Let rise until double its bulk and bake 25 or 30 minutes in
moderate oven. It will be well to consult some experienced person
as to lightness of sponge and dough.




BISCUITS


MATERIAL:

1 cup Pillsbury's Best
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 tablespoon cold butter
1/2 cup milk

WAY OF PREPARING:

Sift flour, salt and baking powder twice. Chop butter in with a
knife until mealy. Add milk for a soft dough. Place on a board
with a little flour. Knead gently until smooth. Roll out to
one-half inch thickness. Use small cutter and place biscuits in
greased pan. Bake in a hot oven until nicely browned.




GINGER BREAD


MATERIAL:

1/2 cup molasses
1 cup sugar
5 tablespoons melted butter
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon ginger
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon soda
1 egg
2-1/2 cups Pillsbury's Best
1 cup hot water

WAY OF PREPARING:

Put molasses in a bowl. Add sugar, melted butter, cinnamon and
ginger. Put soda and salt in a cup and fill with hot water. Stir
into first mixture. Add flour, then well beaten egg. Beat hard.
Bake for thirty minutes in a well greased pan. Watch oven
closely, as ginger bread burns easily. This makes a good sized
cake.




[Illustration:

    "Here are Felix and Mary Ann
    Looking in at the Gingerbread Man,
    Which was baked in the baker's pan;
    Cloves for his eyes and paste for his tie,--
    Wondering whether the price is high."
]




SPONGE CAKE


MATERIAL:

1 cup sugar
2 eggs
1/2 cup hot water
1-1/4 cups Pillsbury's Best
1-1/2 teaspoons baking powder
pinch of salt
1/2 teaspoon vanilla

WAY OF PREPARING:

Separate eggs, beating whites to a stiff froth. Set them aside.
Beat yolks until thick. Add sugar gradually, then water, salt,
flour and baking powder. Beat thoroughly. Fold in whites and add
vanilla. Bake twenty minutes in a buttered and floured shallow
pan in moderate oven.




MUFFINS


MATERIAL:

1/3 cup butter
1/4 cup sugar
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 egg
2 cups Pillsbury's Best
4 teaspoons baking powder
1 cup milk

WAY OF PREPARING:

Beat butter, sugar and egg until creamy. Add milk little at a
time, stirring in gradually flour sifted with salt and baking
powder. Grease muffin pan, heat slightly, put in mixture and bake
in quick oven.




CREAMED POTATOES


MATERIAL:

6 medium potatoes
3 tablespoons Pillsbury's Best
2 tablespoons butter
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/8 teaspoon pepper
1-1/2 cups milk

WAY OF PREPARING:

Pare potatoes, cut into dice, wash in cold water. Cover with
boiling water, salt and place on range. Boil until tender, but
not mealy. Have ready the cream dressing. This is made by rubbing
flour and butter together, adding the milk, salt and pepper, and
cooking in double boiler, stirring constantly until like custard.
Drain potatoes of water, let them steam a moment, then stir
lightly into dressing. Serve hot.




FUDGE


MATERIAL:

1-1/2 tablespoons butter
1 cup sugar
1/4 cup milk
2 tablespoons molasses
1 square chocolate
1/2 teaspoon vanilla

WAY OF PREPARING:

Melt butter in a granite pan. Add sugar, milk and molasses,
stirring gently until sugar is dissolved. Boil slowly without
stirring for five minutes. Add chocolate square and stir until
melted. Boil again until a little of mixture dropped in cold
water seems brittle. Take from range, add vanilla, beat until it
begins to thicken, then pour into a buttered pan. Cool and mark
into squares.




CHOCOLATE CAKE


MATERIAL:

1/4 cup butter
1/2 cup sugar
1 egg
1/2 cup milk
1 scant cup Pillsbury's Best
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 square melted chocolate
1/4 teaspoon vanilla

WAY OF PREPARING:

Stir butter, egg and sugar until creamy. Add milk little at a
time, stirring in gradually flour, sifted with baking powder. Now
stir in melted chocolate, add vanilla and beat hard. Bake twenty
minutes in a greased shallow pan.




[Illustration:

    "This world is so full of a number of things,
    I am sure we should all be as happy as kings."
]




JOHNNY CAKE


MATERIAL:

3/4 cup corn meal
3/4 cup Pillsbury's Best
3 teaspoons baking powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons sugar
1 egg
1 cup milk
1 tablespoon melted butter

WAY OF PREPARING:

Sift cornmeal, flour, baking powder, sugar and salt together. Add
milk gradually, well beaten egg and melted butter. Grease shallow
pan, heat slightly, pour in mixture and bake twenty minutes in
hot oven.




LITTLE TALKS WITH LITTLE COOKS


The table around which the household gathers three times a day
furnishes the chief opportunity for showing the results of good
training, whether received in school or home. We show our
unselfishness in preferring one another, anticipating one
another's wants.

On the table is shown the result of the unselfish thought and
care of the chief home-maker. The labor connected with the
preparation of the meal is either a burden or a pleasure as one's
previous training has made possible.

We get the best training for active life, in other than household
work, early in life, at school and home. Why not learn to be good
home-makers while still young?

We like to do what we do well. If we learn early, we learn easily
and well--the work is a pleasure and success is assured.

Beginners should master the little recipes included in this book.
They require only a small amount of material, but enough for
success.




[Illustration]

    This is the tale that was told to me
    By a loaf of home-made bread, you see,
      As it sat one night on the pantry shelf--
      A loaf on each side of it--just like itself,
    While grouped around stood the pies and cakes,
    The good old kind like mother makes,
      And one and all then and there confessed
      That they owed their existence to Pillsbury's Best.




[Illustration]

    I seem to trace through the distant haze
    My byegone life in the good old days;
      I see in my vision a field of wheat--
      I knew I was there that the world might eat--
    I drank of the showers and the morning dew;
    In the noonday sun I throve and grew--
      Grew on the verge of a sunny crest,
      Just as fast as I could for Pillsbury's Best.




[Illustration]

    And when I had grown both tall and strong
    The reapers came--a merry throng--
      And through the fields they wend their way,
      Just to and fro through the livelong day.
    Perhaps they were rude--for they cut me dead--
    But what if they did?--I kept my head
      And turned on my back and laughed in glee
      At the thought of the good, good flour I'd be.

[Illustration]

    I know I was good, yet the day came at last
    When they said I'd be better if soundly thrashed.
      Please pardon me here--I can't dwell on this much,
      The subject is painful--my feelings are such.
    Oh my! but the straw, it flew high in the air
    And the chaff chaffed unceasing, but I didn't care,
      My laughter rang forth with increased vim and zest,
      My chastisement I knew--just meant Pillsbury's Best.

[Illustration]

    And then came the time when I journeyed away
    To the mills where the "Roller Mills" roll all day,
      And all of them smiled with a happy grin
      And welcomed us poor little wheatlets in;
    Oh! the grind of life--I was grasped and seized,
    I really can't say I was very much pleased;
      But to say the least, I was much impressed,
      And when I got through I was Pillsbury's Best.

[Illustration: The mills where the roller mills roll all day.]

[Illustration]

    And now in the latest fashions gay
    In the big round world I have my say,
      For in this most becoming sack,
      Please note the hang--both front and back,
    I journey far from the land of my birth
    To feed the hungry hordes of Earth;
      For those who know ne'er fail to say
      That Pillsbury's flour o'er the world holds sway.

[Illustration]

    To the kitchen I go--to the bakers who bake
    The bread and the cookies, the pies and the cake;
      It was there that I met the package of yeast
      Who raised the dough for the coming feast,
    And that's why I sit and talk to-night,
    For to-morrow I know I'll be out of sight;
      So I'll toast myself ere this tale I close,
      To Pillsbury's Best, the flour one knows.




[Illustration:

    _This is the tale of the loaf on the shelf.
    As told to me by the loaf itself._
]

[Illustration: Pillsbury's BEST XXXX]





End of Project Gutenberg's A Little Book for A Little Cook, by L. P. Hubbard

