*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MCGUFFEY'S FIRST READER ***




Produced by Don Kostuch





[Transcriber's Notes:

Welcome to the schoolroom of 1900. The moral tone is plain. "She is kind
to the old blind man."

The exercises are still suitable, and perhaps more helpful than some
contemporary alternatives. Much is left to the teacher. Explanations given
in the text are enough to get started teaching a child to read and write.
Counting in Roman numerals is included as a bonus in the form of lesson
numbers.

Each lesson begins with vocabulary words, followed by the description of a
picture (if any) related to the lesson's reading exercise. The lesson then
consists of printed text for reading and sometimes script (handwriting)
for reading or copying.

Don Kostuch
]



ECLECTIC EDUCATIONAL SERIES.

MCGUFFEY'S [Registered]

First

ECLECTIC READER

Revised Edition


McGuffey Edition and Colophon are Trademarks of

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
NEW YORK - CHICHESTER - WEINHEIM - BRISBANE - SINGAPORE - TORONTO

SUGGESTIONS TO TEACHERS.

This First Reader may be used in teaching reading by any of the methods in
common use; but it is especially adapted to the Phonic Method, the Word
Method, or a combination of the two.

I. Phonic Method.--First teach the elementary sounds and their
representative, the letters marked with diacriticals, as they occur in the
lessons; then, the formation of words by the combination of these sounds.
For instance, teach the pupil to identify the characters a, o, n, d, g, r,
and th, in Lesson I, as the representatives of certain elementary sounds;
then teach him to form the words at the head of the lesson, then other
words, as nag, on, and, etc. Pursue a similar course in teaching the
succeeding lessons. Having read a few lessons in this manner, begin to
teach the names of the letters and the spelling of words, and require the
groups, "a man," "the man," "a pen," to be read as a good reader would
pronounce single words.

II.  When one of the letters in the combinations ou or ow, is marked in
the words at the head of the reading exercises, the other is silent. If
neither is marked, the two letters represent a diphthong. All other
unmarked vowels in the vocabularies, when in combination, are silent
letters. In slate or blackboard work, the silent letters may be canceled.

III. Word Method.--Teach the pupil to identify at sight the words placed
at the head of the reading exercises, and to read these exercises without
hesitation. Having read a few lessons, begin to teach the names of the
letters and the spelling of words.

IV. Word Method and Phonic Method Combined.--Teach the pupil to identify
words and read sentences, as above. Having read a few lessons in this
manner, begin to use the Phonic Method, combining it with the Word Method,
by first teaching the words in each lesson as words; then the elementary
sounds, the names of the letters, and spelling.

V. Teach the pupil to use script letters in writing, when teaching the
names of the letters and the spelling of words.


Copyright, 1879, by Van Antwerp, Bragg & Co.
Copyright, 1896, by American Book Company.
Copyright, 1907 and 1920, by H.H. Vail.

EP486



Preface

In presenting McGuffey’s Revised First Reader to the public, attention is
invited to the following features:

1. Words of only two or three letters are used in the first lessons.
Longer and more difficult ones are gradually introduced as the pupil gains
aptness in the mastery of words.

2. A proper gradation has been carefully preserved. All new words are
placed at the head of each lesson, to be learned before the lesson is
read. Their number in the early lessons is very small, thus making the
first steps easy. All words in these vocabularies are used in the text
immediately following.

3. Carefully engraved script exercises are introduced for a double
purpose. These should be used to teach the reading of script; and may also
serve as copies in slate work.

4. The illustrations have been designed and engraved specially for the
lessons in which they occur. Many of the engravings will serve admirably
as the basis for oral lessons in language.

5. The type is large, strong, and distinct.

The credit for this revision is almost wholly due to the  friends of
McGuffey’s Readers,--eminent teachers and scholars, who have contributed
suggestions and criticisms gained from their daily work in the schoolroom.

Cincinnati, June, 1879.

                                                                     (iii)



THE ALPHABET.

A    a      N   n
B    b      O   o
C    c      P   p
D    d      Q   q
E    e      R   r
F    f      S   s
G    g      T   t
H    h      U   u
I    i      V   v
J    j      W   w
K    k      X   x
L    l      Y   y
M    m      Z   z



[Illustration:

Script Alphabet

A  B  C  D  E  F  G
H  I  J  K  L  M  N
O  P  Q  R  S  Y  U
V  W  X  Y  Z

a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i
j  k  l  m  n  o  p  q
r  s  t  u  v  w  x  y  z

SCRIPT FIGURES

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0
]


[Illustration: Dog]



McGuffey's FIRST READER.



LESSON I.

dog   the   ran

a   o    n   d   g   r   th


[Illustration: Running dog.]


The dog.

The dog ran.



LESSON II.

cat    mat    is    on

c    t    i    m    s


[Illustration: Cat]


The cat.        The mat.

Is the cat on the mat?

The cat is on the mat.



LESSON III.

it    his    pen    hand

a     in     has    man

p     h      e


[Illustration: Man with glasses writing at a desk.]


The man.           A pen.

The man has a pen.

Is the pen in his hand?

It is in his hand.



LESSON IV.

hen    fat    rat    box    big    run    from    can

f      b      x      u


[Illustration: Hen watching a rat.]


A fat hen.       A big rat.

The fat hen is on the box.

The rat ran from the box.

Can the hen run?



LESSON V.

Rab    Ann    hat    catch    see

e      ch     s


[Illustration: Girl chasing dog with hat in his mouth.]


See Rab!   See Ann!

See!  Rab has the hat.

Can Ann catch Rab?



LESSON VI.

she    pat    too    now    let    me

sh     oo     ow     l


[Illustration: Girl with dog]


Ann can catch Rab.

See! She has the hat.

Now Ann can pat Rab.

Let me pat Rab, too.



LESSON VII.

Ned    eggs    black    left    fed    nest    them    get    will

a black hen             the nest

w   ck


[Illustration: Boy feeding a hen.]


Ned has fed the hen.

She is a black hen.

She has left the nest.

See the eggs in the nest!

Will the hen let Ned get them?



LESSON VIII.

head    he    Nat    come    with    and    o


[Illustration: Three children, boy seated, boy standing with large top
hat, followed by girl adjusting the hat.]


Let me get the black hat. Now Ned has it on his head, and he is a big man.

Come, Nat, see the big man with his black hat.



LESSON IX. REVIEW.

pat    catch    has    left    hat    can

black  eggs     Rab    Ann     fed    get


Ned is on the box. He has a pen in his hand. A big rat is in the box.
Can the dog catch the rat?

Come with me, Ann, and see the man with a black hat on his head.

The fat hen has left the nest.  Run, Nat, and get the eggs.


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

The cat ran. Ann ran.

The man has a hat.
]



LESSON X.

Nell    some    pan    him    yes     do      you    have

I       to      i      y      v       o


[Illustration: Girl holding eggs.]


Do you see Nell?

Yes; she has a pan with some eggs in it.

Let me have the pan and the eggs, will you, Nell?

Has the black hen left the nest?

I will now run to catch Rab. Will you run, too?



LESSON XI.

O    whip    Ben    up    still    sit    if    stand    Jip

o    wh      j


[Illustration: Girl, boy, goat pulling cart.]


O Ben! let me get in, will you?

Yes, if you will sit still.

Stand still, Jip, and let Ann get in.

Now, Ben, hand me the whip.

Get up, Jip!


1,2.



LESSON XII.

Kitty    nice    sweet    sing    just    hang

cage     then    song     pet     put     not

k    g    c    a    y    ng    u


[Illustration: Girl sitting at window with bird cage.]


Kitty has a nice pet. It can sing a sweet song.

She has just fed it.

She will now put it in the cage, and hang the cage up. Then the cat can
not catch it.



LESSON XIII.

Tom    top    Kit'ty's    at      back

look   good   doll       think   spot

th     n      oo


[Illustration: Boy and Dog]


Look at Tom and his dog. The dog has a black spot on his back. Do you
think he is a good dog?

Tom has a big top, too. It is on the box with Kitty's doll.



LESSON XIV.

sun    we     how    pond    stop    for

go     swim   her    us      hot     duck

e      o


[Illustration: Man and girl standing by a pond.]


The sun is up. The man has fed the black hen and the fat duck.

Now the duck will swim in the pond. The hen has run to her nest.

Let us not stop at the pond now, for it is hot.

See how still it is! We will go to see Tom and his top.



LESSON XV.

John    rock     set    jump    fun    must

may     un'der   skip   bank    but    touch


O John! the sun has just set. It is not hot, now.

Let us run and jump. I think it is fun to run, and skip, and jump.

See the duck on the pond! Her nest is up on the bank, under the rock.

We must not touch the nest, but we may look at it



LESSON XVI. REVIEW.

The sun has set, and the pond is still.

John, Ned, Ben, Tom, and Nell stand on the bank, and look at the duck.


The dog with a black spot on his back, is with Tom. See! Tom has his hat
in his hand. He has left his big top on the box.

Kitty's doll is on the rock. Nell has put her pet in the cage. It will
sing a sweet song. The duck has her nest under the rock.

It is not hot now. Let us run, and skip, and jump on the bank. Do you not
think it is fun?



LESSON XVII.

are    ink    moss    this    tub    up set'    a


SLATE WORK

[Illustration: Script Exercise:
The pen and the ink are on
the stand.  Is this a good
pen?  The moss is on the
rock.  This duck can swim.
Ben upset the tub.
]


LESSON XVIII.

nut    did    shut    shall    lost    fox

men    met    step    in'to    hunt    mud


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Will the dog hunt a fox?
Ben lost his hat. Shall I
shut the box? I met him
on the step. Did you jump
into the mud? I have a
nut. I met the man.
]



LESSON XIX.

Kate    old     no     grass    dear    likes

be      drink   milk   cow      out     gives

a


[Illustration: Cow standing in pond.]


O Kate! the old cow is in the pond: see her drink! Will she not come out
to get some grass?

No, John, she likes to be in the pond. See how still she stands!

The dear old cow gives us sweet milk to drink.



LESSON XX.

mam ma'    large    as      pa pa     arms      ride

far        barn     both    Prince    trot      your


[Illustration: Man and girl riding a horse.]


Papa, will you let me ride with you on Prince? I will sit still in your
arms.

See, mamma! We are both on Prince. How large he is!

Get up, Prince! You are not too fat to trot as far as the barn.



LESSON XXI.

of      that    toss     fall               well      Fan'ny

ball    wall    was      pret'ty(prit-)     done      what

a       a


[Illustration: Two girls standing in meadow play with a ball.]


O Fanny, what a pretty ball!

Yes; can you catch it, Ann?

Toss it to me, and see. I will not let it fall.

That was well done

Now, Fanny, toss it to the top of the wall, if you can.



LESSON XXII.

had    went    call    might    flag    near    swam    swing


[Illustration: Woman and two girls standing by gate in fence.]


Did you call us, mamma?

I went with Tom to the pond. I had my doll, and Tom had his flag.

The fat duck swam to the bank, and we fed her. Did you think we might fall
into the pond?

We did not go too near, did we, Tom?

May we go to the swing, now, mamma?



LESSON XXIII.

here    band     hear     horse    play    they

pass    where    front    fine     hope    comes

e       e


[Illustration: Two boy standing on porch as band passes in street.]


Here comes the band! Shall we call mamma and Fanny to see it?

Let us stand still, and hear the men play as they pass.

I hope they will stop here and play for us.

See the large man in front of the band, with his big hat. What has he in
his hand? How fine he looks!

Look, too, at the man on that fine horse.

If the men do not stop, let us go with them and see where they go.



LESSON XXIV.

Bess       hap'py    make    cart       tent    woods

lit'tle    ver'y     bed     Rob'ert    gone    draw


[Illustration: Boy and girl with goat-cart in woods; tent in background.]


Bess and Robert are very happy; papa and mamma have gone to the woods with
them.

Robert has a big tent and a flag, and Bess has a little bed for her doll.

Jip is with them. Robert will make him draw Bess and her doll in the cart.



LESSON XXV.

James    Ma'ry   made    sang    my        lay

sport    spade   lap     dig     doll's    sand

said (sed)       y


[Illustration: Boy talking to girl sitting on steps with a doll.]


"Kate, will you play with me?" said James. "We will dig in the sand with
this little spade. That will be fine sport."

"Not now James" said Kate; "for I must make my doll's bed. Get Mary to
play with you."

James went to get Mary to play with him. Then Kate made the doll's bed.

She sang a song to her doll, and the doll lay very still in her lap.

Did the doll hear Kate sing?



LESSON XXVI.

its    shade    brook     picks    all

by     help     stones    glad     soft


[Illustration: Two girls and boy in the woods.]


Kate has left her doll in its little bed, and has gone to play with Mary
and James. They are all in the shade, now, by the brook.

James digs in the soft sand with his spade, and Mary picks up little
stones and puts them in her lap.

James and Mary are glad to see Kate. She will help them pick up stones and
dig, by the little brook.


1,3.


LESSON XXVII. REVIEW

"What shall we do?" said Fanny to John. "I do not like to sit still. Shall
we hunt for eggs in the barn?"

"No" said John; "I like to play on the grass. Will not papa let us catch
Prince, and go to the big woods?"

"We can put the tent in the cart, and go to some nice spot where the grass
is soft and sweet."

"That will be fine," said Fanny. "I will get my doll, and give her a ride
with us."

"Yes," said John, "and we will get mamma to go, too. She will hang up a
swing for us in the shade."



LESSON XXVIII.

peep    while    take    sleep    tuck    safe

oh      wet      feet    chick    can't   feels    wing


[Illustration: Girl kneeling by small chicken coop.]


Peep, peep! Where have you gone, little chick? Are you lost? Can't you get
back to the hen?

Oh, here you are! I will take you back. Here, hen, take this little chick
under your wing.

Now, chick, tuck your little, wet feet under you, and go to sleep for a
while.

Peep, peep! How safe the little chick feels now!



LESSON XXIX.

wind    time      there    fence    kite    high

eyes    bright    flies    why      day     shines


[Illustration: Boys playing with kite. A dog stand by the boys.]


This is a fine day. The sun shines bright. There is a good wind, and my
kite flies high. I can just see it.

The sun shines in my eyes; I will stand in the shade of this high fence.

Why, here comes my dog! He was under the cart. Did you see him there?

What a good time we have had! Are you not glad that we did not go to the
woods with John?


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

The pond is still. How it
shines in the hot sun! Let
us go into the woods where
we can sit in the shade.
]



LESSON XXX.

wish    float    tie      know

rope    boat     try      shore

give    pole     don't    push

drag    won't    oar      fun'ny


[Illustration: Two girls standing by fence, one is pulling
a small wooden tub with a rope along the path.]


"Kate, I wish we had a boat to put the dolls in. Don't you?"

"I know what we can do. We can get the little tub, and tie a rope to it,
and drag it to the pond. This will float with the dolls in it, and we can
get a pole to push it from the shore."

"What a funny boat, Kate! A tub for a boat, and a pole for an oar! Won't
it upset?"

"We can try it, Nell, and see."

"Well you get the tub, and I will get a pole and a rope. We will put both
dolls in the tub, and give them a ride."


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

The dolls had a nice ride
to the pond. A soft wind
made the tub float out.
Nell let the pole fall on
the tub, and upset it.
]



LESSON XXXI.

bound     Rose       called     got       drown      found       brave

came      Pon'to     jumped     mouth     a round'    brought    wa'ter


[Illustration: Two girls standing by pond. One girl is using a
pole to push a small wooden tub containing dolls. ]


"Here, Ponto! Here, Ponto!" Kate called to her dog. "Come, and get the
dolls out of the pond."

Rose went under, but she did not drown. Bess was still on the top of the
water.

Ponto came with a bound, and jumped into the pond. He swam around, and got
Bess in his mouth, and brought her to the shore.

Ponto then found Rose, and brought her out, too.

Kate said, "Good, old Ponto! Brave old dog!"

What do you think of Ponto?



LESSON XXXII.

June    Lu'cy's    air           kind    trees     sing'ing    blue

when    pure       says (sez)    sky     pic'nic   u           a


[Illustration: Woman and girl sitting under a tree.]


"What a bright June day! The air is pure. The sky is as blue as it can be.

Lucy and her mamma are in the woods. They have found a nice spot, where
there is some grass.

They sit in the shade of the trees, and Lucy is singing.

The trees are not large, but they make a good shade.

Lucy's kind mamma says that they will have a picnic when her papa can get
a tent.



LESSON XXXIII. REVIEW.

James and Robert have gone into the shade of a high wall to play ball.

Mary and Lucy have come up from the pond near by, with brave old Ponto, to
see them play.

When they toss the ball up in the air, and try to catch it, Ponto runs to
get it in his mouth.

Now the ball is lost. They all look for it under the trees and in the
grass; but they can not see it. Where can it be?

See! Ponto has found it. Here he comes with it. He will lay it at little
Lucy's feet, or put it in her hand.



LESSON XXXIV.

boy     our       spoil    hur rah'    own      coil

noise   fourth    such     join        thank    a bout'

hoist   pay       Ju ly'   playing     oi


[Illustration: Five boys carrying a large American flag. Man in background
is smoking a pipe.]


"Papa, may we have the big flag?" said James.

"What can my little boy do with such a big flag?"

"Hoist it on our tent, papa. We are playing Fourth of July."

"Is that what all this noise is about? Why not hoist your own flags?"

"Oh! they are too little."

"You might spoil my flag."

"Then we will all join to pay for it. But we will not spoil it, papa."

"Take it, then, and take the coil of rope with it."

"Oh! thank you. Hurrah for the flag, boys!"



LESSON XXXV.

fin'ished    bon'net    les'son    saved        white     a way'

I've         am         work       scam'per     read'y    gar'den


[Illustration: White kitten lapping milk from a bowl.]


THE WHITE KITTEN.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Kitty, my pretty, white kitty.
   Why do you scamper away?
I've finished my work and my lesson
   And now I am ready for play.

Come, kitty, my own little kitty.
   I've saved you some milk come and see.
Now drink while I put on my bonnet,
   And play in the garden with me.
]



LESSON XXXVI.

care    al'ways       line     Frank

row     been (bin)    keeps    home


[Illustration: Boy untying a white boat from post in pond.]


Frank has a pretty boat. It is white, with a black line near the water.

He keeps it in the pond, near his home. He always takes good care of it.

Frank has been at work in the garden, and will now row a while.



LESSON XXXVII.

much    one (wun)     yet     hun'gry

seen    grand'ma      corn    would    o


[Illustration: Two children on porch. Girl is holding a bowl.
Boy is seated on the step holding a model sailboat.]


"What is that?" said Lucy, as she came out on the steps. "Oh, it is a
little boat! What a pretty one it is!"

"I will give it to you when it is finished," said John, kindly. "Would you
like to have it?"

"Yes, very much, thank you, John. Has grandma seen it?"

"Not yet; we will take it to her by and by. What have you in your pan,
Lucy?"

"Some corn for my hens, John; they must be very hungry by this time."



LESSON XXXVIII.

mar'ket    bread     bas'ket    bought    meat

tea        try'ing   tell       which


[Illustration: Woman and boy walking on path next to fence.
Woman is carrying a basket.]


James has been to market with his mamma.

She has bought some bread, some meat, and some tea, which are in the
basket on her arm.

James is trying to tell his mamma what he has seen in the market.



LESSON XXXIX.

reads    so      wears    please    could    hair

fast     love    eas'y    gray      chair    who     glass'es


[Illustration: Girl standing by old woman in rocking chair.]


See my dear, old grandma in her easy-chair! How gray her hair is! She
wears glasses when she reads.

She is always kind, and takes such good care of me that I like to do what
she tells me.

When she says, "Robert, will you get me a drink?"  I run as fast as I can
to get it for her. Then she says, "Thank you, my boy."

Would you not love a dear, good grandma, who is so kind? And would you not
do all yon could to please her?



LESSON XL.

does    won'der    moth'er    oth'er    bee    hon'ey    lis'ten    flow'er


[Illustration: Girl standing next to woman seated on porch.]


"Come here, Lucy, and listen! What is in this flower?"

"O mother! it is a bee. I wonder how it came to be shut up in the flower!"

"It went into the flower for some honey, and it may be it went to sleep.
Then the flower shut it in.

"The bee likes honey as well as we do, but it does not like to be shut up
in the flower.

"Shall we let it out, Lucy?"

"Yes; then it can go to other flowers, and get honey."



LESSON XLI.

best    hitched    their    should     or      rid'ing

live    holds      hay      driv'ing   tight   ear'ly


[Illustration: One boy riding a horse, and another boy riding a cart
pulled by a horse.]


Here come Frank and James White. Do you know where they live?

Frank is riding a horse, and James is driving one hitched to a cart. They
are out very early in the day. How happy they are!

See how well Frank rides, and how tight James holds the lines!

The boys should be kind to their horses. It is not best to whip them.

When they have done riding, they will give the horses some hay or corn.


Slate Work

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Some horses can trot very
fast. Would you like to ride
fast? One day I saw a dog
hitched up a little cart. The
cart had some corn in it.
]



LESSON XLII.

look'ing    thought   pick'ing    heard    chirp    were    told    birds

search     dear'ly    young       girl     loved    chil'dren    be sides'


[Illustration: Girl picking flowers.]


A little girl went in search of flowers for her mother. It was early in
the day, and the grass was wet. Sweet little birds were singing all around
her.

And what do you think she found besides flowers? A nest with young birds
in it.

While she was looking at them, she heard the mother bird chirp, as if she
said, "Do not touch my children, little girl, for I love them dearly."

The little girl now thought how dearly her own mother loved her.

So she left the birds. Then picking some flowers, she went home, and told
her mother what she had seen and heard.



LESSON XLIII.

eight    ask    aft'er    town    past    ah    tick'et

right    half   two       train   ding    light'ning


[Illustration: Boy and girl sitting in wicker clothes basket.
Woman sitting in chair.]


"Mamma, will you go to town?"

"What do you ask for a ticket on your train?"

"Oh! we will give you a ticket, mamma."

"About what time will you get back? "

"At half past eight."

"Ah! that is after bedtime. Is this the fast train?"

"Yes, this is the lightning train."

"Oh! that is too fast for me."

"What shall we get for you in town, mamma?"

"A big basket, with two good little children in it."

"All right! Time is up! Ding, ding!"



LESSON XLIV.

school    e'ven (e'vn)    three    room    small

book      teach'er        noon     rude    read'ing    poor


[Illustration: Several children in woods. Three are holding books,
others are playing with a ball.]


It is noon, and the school is out. Do you see the children at play? Some
run and jump, some play ball, and three little girls play school under a
tree.

What a big room for such a small school!

Mary is the teacher. They all have books in their hands, and Fanny is
reading.

They are all good girls, and would not be rude even in playing school.

Kate and Mary listen to Fanny as she reads from her book.

What do you think she is reading about? I will tell you. It is about a
poor little boy who was lost in the woods.

When Fanny has finished, the three girls will go home.

In a little while, too, the boys will give up their playing.



LESSON XLV.

ap'ple    mew    tease    crack'er    down    new    sil'ly    a sleep'

wants     calls  knew     friends     up on'  flew   Poll      Pol'ly


[Illustration: Girl sitting at dinner table. Parrot is on a perch
in the foreground.]


Lucy has a new pet. Do you know what kind of bird it is? Lucy calls her
Polly.

Polly can say, "Poor Poll! Poor Poll! Polly wants a cracker;" and she can
mew like a cat.

But Polly and the cat are not good friends. One day Polly flew down, and
lit upon the cat's back when she was asleep.

I think she knew the cat would not like that, and she did it to tease her.

When Lucy pets the cat, Polly flies up into the old apple tree, and will
not come when she calls her. Then Lucy says, "What a silly bird!"



LESSON XLVI. REVIEW.


"Well, children, did you have a nice time in the woods?"

"Oh yes, mother, such a good time! See what sweet flowers we found, and
what soft moss. The best flowers are for grandma. Won't they please her?"

"Yes; and it will please grandma to know that you thought of her."


[Illustration: Dog sitting by picnic basket in woods. Two dolls are
lying next to the basket.]


"Rab was such a good dog, mother.

We left him under the big tree by the brook, to take care of the dolls and
the basket.

"When we came back, they were all safe. No one could get them while Rab
was there. We gave him some of the crackers from the basket.

"O mother, how the birds did sing in the woods!

"Fanny said she would like to be a bird, and have a nest in a tree. But I
think she would want to come home to sleep."

"If she were a bird, her nest would be her home. But what would mother do,
I wonder, without her little Fanny?"



LESSON XLVII.

beach    shells    these    seat        waves     go'ing

ev'er    sea       watch    e'ven ing   la'zy     side


[Illustration: Horses pulling family in wagon.]


These boys and girls live near the sea. They have been to the beach. It is
now evening, and they are going home.

John, who sits on the front seat, found some pretty shells. They are in
the basket by his side.

Ben White is driving. He holds the lines in one hand, and his whip in the
other.

Robert has his hat in his hand, and is looking at the horses. He thinks
they are very lazy; they do not trot fast.

The children are not far from home. In a little while the sun will set,
and it will be bedtime.

Have you ever been at the seaside? Is it not good sport to watch the big
waves, and to play on the wet sand?



LESSON XLVIII.

log    qui'et    proud    pulled    fish    stump    riv'er    fa'ther


[Illustration: Father and son fishing from under a tree.]


One evening Frank's father said to him, "Frank, would you like to go with
me to catch some fish?"

"Yes; may I go? and with you, father?"

"Yes, Frank, with me."

"Oh, how glad I am!"

Here they are, on the bank of a river. Frank has just pulled a fine fish
out of the water. How proud he feels!

See what a nice, quiet spot they have found. Frank has the stump of a big
tree for his seat, and his father sits on a log near by. They like the
sport.



LESSON XLIX.

rain     out'side    of'ten    pit'ter       say      win'dow

sound    pat'ter     drops     some'times    on'ly    mu'sic


SLATE WORK

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

I wish, Mamma you would
tell me where the rain comes
from. Does it come from the
sky? And when the little
drops pitter-patter on the window
do you think they are
playing with me? I can not
work or read for I love to listen
to them. I often think their
sound is pretty music. But the
rain keeps children at home
and sometimes I do not like
that, then.
The little raindrops only say,
"Pit, pitter, patter, pat;
While we play on the out-side,
Why can't you play on that?"
]



LESSON L.

sled    throw    win'ter    hurt    ice      cov'er    Hen'ry       next

skate   ground   mer'ry     snow    sister   laugh'ing (laf'ing)    pair


[Illustration: Children skating and playing in the snow.]


I like winter, when snow and ice cover the ground. What fun it is to throw
snowballs, and to skate on the ice!

See the boys and girls! How merry they are! Henry has his sled, and draws
his little sister. There they go!

I think Henry is kind, for his sister is too small to skate.

Look! Did you see that boy fall down? But I see he is not hurt, for he is
laughing.

Some other boys have just come to join in the sport. See them put on their
skates.

Henry says, that he hopes his father will get a pair of skates for his
sister next winter.



LESSON LI.

paw      po lite'    means     isn't    speak   sir    shake    Fi'do

tricks   teach       din'ner   El'len   bow'wow


[Illustration: Girl and boy playing with dog. Dog on hind legs,
seated on chair, with hat on head.]


Ellen, do look at Fido! He sits up in a chair, with my hat on. He looks
like a little boy; but it is only Fido.

Now see him shake hands. Give me your paw, Fido. How do you do, sir? Will
you take dinner with us. Fido? Speak! Fido says, "Bowwow," which means,
"Thank you, I will."

Isn't Fido a good dog, Ellen? He is always so polite.

When school is out, I will try to teach him some other tricks.



LESSON LII.

puss     shed     pain     way          stole    saw     hid    eat

Hat'tie  suf'fer  sor'ry   some'thing   caught   tried   Ne'ro


[Illustration: Cat sitting on box.]


"O Hattie! I just saw a large rat in the shed; and old Nero tried to catch
it."

"Did he catch it, Frank?"

"No; Nero did not; but the old cat did."

"My cat?"

"No, it was the other one."

"Do tell me how she got it, Frank. Did she run after it?"

"No, that was not the way. Puss was hid on a big box. The rat stole out,
and she jumped at it and caught it."

"Poor rat! It must have been very hungry; it came out to get something to
eat."

"Why, Hattie, you are not sorry puss got the rat, are you?"

"No, I can not say I am sorry she got it; but I do not like to see even a
rat suffer pain."



LESSON LIII.

roll       build    grand'pa    hard     foam       ships

hous'es    long     sail        break    wood'en    blow


[Illustration: Two girls play in sand. Man with cane and top hat is
seated on beach.]


Mary and Lucy have come down to the beach with their grandpa. They live in
a town near the sea.

Their grandpa likes to sit on the large rock, and watch the big ships as
they sail far away on the blue sea. Sometimes he sits there all day long.

The little girls like to dig in the sand, and pick up pretty shells. They
watch the waves as they roll up on the beach, and break into white foam.

They sometimes make little houses of sand, and build walls around them;
and they dig wells with their small wooden spades.

They have been picking up shells for their little sister. She is too young
to come to the beach.

I think all children like to play by the seaside when the sun is bright,
and the wind does not blow too hard.



LESSON LIV.

asked    want'ed    four    Wil'lie's    night     rab'bits

lad      car'ried   cents   tell'ing     fif'ty    mas'ter


[Illustration: Two boys playing with rabbits.]


One day, Willie's father saw a boy at the market with four little white
rabbits in a basket.

He thought these would be nice pets for Willie; so he asked the lad how
much he wanted for his rabbits.

The boy said, "Only fifty cents, sir."

Willie's father bought them, and carried them home.

Here you see the rabbits and their little master. He has a pen for them,
and always shuts them in it at night to keep them safe.

He gives them bread and grass to eat. They like grass, and will take it
from his hand. He has called in a little friend to see them.

Willie is telling him about their funny ways.

SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Some rabbits are as white as
snow, some are black, and others
have white and black spots.
What soft, kind eyes they have.
]



LESSON LV.

bush     cun'ning    place     show    find    bro'ken

o'ver    bring       a'gain (a gen')   fas'ten (fas' n )


[Illustration: Boy and girl looking over a fence in woods.]


"Come here, Rose. Look down into this bush."

"O Willie! a bird's nest! What cunning, little eggs! May we take it, and
show it to mother? "

"What would the old bird do, Rose, if she should come back and not find
her nest?"

"Oh, we would bring it right back, Willie!"

"Yes; but we could not fasten it in its place again. If the wind should
blow it over, the eggs would get broken."



LESSON LVI.

strong    round    dry    bill    worked

sends     claws    flit   God     spring


"How does the bird make the nest so strong, Willie?"

"The mother bird has her bill and her claws to work with, but she would
not know how to make the nest if God did not teach her. Do you see what it
is made of?"

"Yes, Willie, I see some horse-hairs and some dry grass. The old bird must
have worked hard to find all the hairs, and make them into such a pretty,
round nest."

"Shall we take the nest, Rose?"

"Oh no, Willie! We must not take it; but we will come and look at it
again, some time."


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

God made the little birds to sing,
   And flit from tree to tree;
'Tis He who sends them in the spring
   To sing for you and me.
]



LESSON LVII.

feathers    a go'    fly    worm    crumb    feed'ing

ug'ly        off     feed   brown   guess    things


[Illustration: Boy and girl examining bird's nest.]


"Willie, when I was feeding the birds just now, a little brown bird flew
away with a crumb in its bill."

"Where did it go, Rose?"

"I don't know; away off, somewhere."

"I can guess where, Rose. Don't you know the nest we saw some days ago?
What do you think is in it now?"

"O Willie, I know! Some little brown birds. Let us go and see them."

"All right; but we must not go too near. There! I just saw the old bird
fly out of the bush. Stand here, Rose. Can you see?"

"Why, Willie, what ugly little things! What big mouths they have, and no
feathers!"

"Keep still, Rose. Here comes the old bird with a worm in her bill. How
hard she must work to feed them all!"



LESSON LVIII.

fallin'g    counts    woes       nigh    be gun'   griefs

stars       tear      morn'ing   Lord    each      joys


[Illustration: Script Exercise:

When the stars at set of sun
  Watch you from on high
When the morning has begun
  Think the Lord is nigh.

All you do and all you say,
  He can see and hear:
When you work and when you play,
  Think the Lord is near.

All your joys and griefs He knows
  Counts each falling tear.
When to Him you tell your woes,
  Know the Lord is near.
]



LESSON LIX.

whis'tle (whis'l)    poc'ket   wil'low   note    filled     dead    sick

walk    ev'ery       blew      lane      lame    tak'ing    cane    took


[Illustration: Girl holding doll and boy with cane standing in woods.]


One day, when Mary was taking a walk down the lane, trying to sing her
doll to sleep, she met Frank, with his basket and cane.

Frank was a poor, little, lame boy. His father and mother were dead. His
dear, old grandma took care of him, and tried to make him happy.

Every day, Mary's mother filled Frank's basket with bread and meat, and a
little tea for his grandma.

"How do you do, Frank?" said Mary. "Don't make a noise; my doll is going
to sleep. It is just a little sick to-day."

"Well, then, let us whistle it to sleep." And Frank, taking a willow
whistle out of his pocket, blew a long note.

"Oh, how sweet!" cried Mary. "Do let me try."



LESSON LX.

turned    face    cried    low    al'most    soon    more    cry

once(wuns)        be cause'


[Illustration: Boy and Girl sitting on log.]


"Yes, Mary, I will give it to you, because you are so good to my grandma."

"Oh! thank you very much." Mary blew and blew a long time. "I can't make
it whistle," said she, almost ready to cry.

"Sometimes they will whistle, and sometimes they won't," said Frank. "Try
again, Mary."

She tried once more, and the whistle made a low, sweet sound. "It
whistles!" she cried.

In her joy, she had turned the doll's face down, and its eyes shut tight,
as if it had gone to sleep.

"There!" cried Frank, "I told you the way to put a doll to sleep, is to
whistle to it."

"So it is," said Mary. "Dear, little thing; it must be put in its bed
now."

So they went into the house. Frank's basket was soon filled, and he went
home happy.



LESSON LXI.

stood     him self'    flap'ping    first      twelve

flapped   walked       flap         o bey'     bet'ter

Chip'py   food         stone        be fore'   chick'ens    kept


[Illustration: Hen and chicks.]


There was once a big, white hen that had twelve little chickens. They were
very small, and the old hen took good care of them. She found food for
them in the daytime, and at night kept them under her wings.

One day, this old hen took her chickens down to a small brook. She thought
the air from the water would do them good.

When they got to the brook, they walked on the bank a little while. It was
very pretty on the other side of the brook, and the old hen thought she
would take her children over there.

There was a large stone in the brook: she thought it would be easy for
them to jump to that stone, and from it to the other side.

So she jumped to the stone, and told the children to come after her. For
the first time, she found that they would not obey her.

She flapped her wings, and cried, "Come here, all of you! Jump upon this
stone, as I did. We can then jump to the other side. Come now!"

"O mother! we can't, we can't, we can't!" said all the little chickens.

"Yes you can, if you try," said the old hen. "Just flap your wings, as I
did, and you can jump over."

"I am flapping my wings," said Chippy, who stood by himself; "but I can't
jump any better than I could before."



LESSON LXII.

chirped    nev'er     in deed'    slow'ly    re'ally    brood

be gan'    did n't    use         door       bite       piece


[Illustration: Hen with chicks.]


"I never saw such children," said the old hen. "You don't try at all."

"We can't jump so far, mother. Indeed we can't, we can't!" chirped the
little chickens.

"Well," said the old hen, "I must give it up." So she jumped back to the
bank, and walked slowly home with her brood.

"I think mother asked too much of us," said one little chicken to the
others.

"Well, I tried," said Chippy.

"We didn't," said the others; "it was of no use to try."

When they got home, the old hen began to look about for something to eat.
She soon found, near the back door, a piece of bread.

So she called the chickens, and they all ran up to her, each one trying to
get a bite at the piece of bread.

"No, no!" said the old hen. "This bread is for Chippy. He is the only one
of my children that really tried to jump to the stone."



LESSON LXIII.

last    slates    write     waste     neat     taken

clean   learn     read'er   par'ents  sec'ond


[Illustration: Teacher with four students in classroom.]


We have come to the last lesson in this book. We have finished the First
Reader.

You can now read all the lessons in it, and can write them on your slates.

Have you taken good care of your book? Children should always keep their
books neat and clean.

Are you not glad to be ready for a new book?

Your parents are very kind to send you to school. If you are good, and if
you try to learn, your teacher will love you, and you will please your
parents.

Be kind to all, and do not waste your time in school. When you go home,
you may ask your parents to get you a Second Reader.



PHONIC CHART.

Long Vocals

Sound   as in      Sound   as in
  a     ate          e      err
  a     care         i      ice
  a     arm          o      ode
  a     last         u      use
  a     all          u      burn
  e     eve          oo     fool

Short Vocals

  a     am           o      odd
  e     end          u      up
  i     in           oo     look

Diphthongs

  oi    oil          ou     out
  oy    boy          ow     now

Aspirates

  f     fifi         t      tat
  h     him          sh     she
  k     kite         ch     chat
  p     pipe         th     thick
  s     same         wh     why


Subvocals

Sound   as in      Sound   as in
  b      bib         v     valve
  d      did         th    this
  g      gig         z     zin
  j      jug         z     azure
  n      nine        r     rare
  m      maim        w     we
  ng     hang        y     yet
  l      lull


Substitutes

Sub   for   as in      Sub   for   as in
 a     o    what        y     i    myth
 e     a    there       c     k    can
 e     a    feint       c     a    cite
 i     e    police      ch    sh   chaise
 i     e    sir         ch    k    chaos
 o     u    son         g     j    gem
 o     oo   to          n     ng   ink
 o     oo   wolf        s     z    as
 o     a    fork        s     sh   sure
 o     u    work        x     gz   exact
 u     oo   full        gh    f    laugh
 u     oo   rude        ph    f    phlox
 y     i    fly         qu    k    pique
 qu    kw   quit





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of McGuffey's First Eclectic Reader,
Revised Edition, by William Holmes McGuffey

